Article: Drafting a C development environment using CMake, Docker, Unity, and GitHub Actions (#351)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/drafting-a-c-development-environment.md

Another benefit is that you can also use your _Dockerfiles_ as recipes in case you need to install tools locally. The real benefit, however, is that it makes it easy for anyone to join a project by using either a prebuilt image or by attempting to build the image locally. Also, your CI can use the same environment as you do!

### Why Docker? Where's the catch?

Don't get me wrong, _Docker_ is far from being perfect and I experienced plenty of issues personally, but it is a decent solution if you keep some limitations in mind. If you're new to _Docker_, maybe consider the following:

- _Dockerfiles_ are not stable. A _Dockerfile_ that built just fine yesterday might fail to build today. There are simply too many external dependencies.
- _Docker_ is not really platform-independent. Especially if you're running a container on other CPU architectures, e.g., Apple ARM, you'll notice that some things don't run. We'll see this later.
- Some _Docker_ features are only supported in Linux or in dedicated Windows containers. E.g., mounting a USB device into a Docker container is not supported on all platforms; a limitation known [since 2016](https://github.com/docker/for-mac/issues/900).

> - _Docker_ is big and thus - just like all the big companies out there - some praised as solutions may be deprecated. I personally experienced this with [docker-machine](https://github.com/docker/roadmap/issues/245). It is always best not to bet 100% on one technology and you always need to be prepared to switch.

Author: Yes, exactly. I'll rephrase it a little. Maybe you have a better and less opinionated proposal that you could come up with :D?

Let's spin up a container from our image and take it for a test drive:

```bash
$ docker run --rm -it --platform linux/amd64 cproject-builder:latest /bin/bash
$
$ gcc --version
gcc (Debian 10.2.1-6) 10.2.1 20210110
Copyright (C) 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
$
$ cmake --version
cmake version 3.18.4

CMake suite maintained and supported by Kitware (kitware.com/cmake).
$ exit
```

When using `apt`, the version of the tools that have been installed depends on the base image and therefore on the package registry. If you want to install specific versions, you can do this by executing custom `RUN` commands as we'll see later.

## Visual Studio Code Dev Containers

The downside of **not** having all tools installed locally is that those tools can not be leveraged by your IDE of choice. E.g., when using `vscode` you won't be able to properly set up intellisense or any other helpers if you don't have any compiler installed.

> `vscode` allows you to run an instance of the editor within a so-called _development container_. This is also the reason why we chose the `mcr.microsoft.com/vscode/devcontainers/base` image as the base image: We can connect `vscode` within our builder container and therefore have all the tools available! Have a look at the [tutorial](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/tutorial) for the exact steps or in case anything fails whilst following along this article. For now, I assume that you have `vscode` and the [Dev Containers](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/containers) extension installed.

Author: I think it is even the very same mechanism as remote sessions, just that vscode spins up the container for you and then taps into it using the remote feature. The extensions need to be installed in this dev container and can be listed in the `.devcontainer` file, I'll mention this again.

```json
{
  "[c]": {
    "editor.formatOnSave": true
  },
  "[cpp]": {
    "editor.formatOnSave": true
  },
  "C_Cpp.default.compileCommands": "${workspaceFolder}/src/build/compile_commands.json",
  "cmake.configureOnOpen": true
}
```

I've hidden a little detail here: `clang-tidy` operates on the `compile_commands.json` file that can be created when using `cmake` as a build system. I've enabled this option within the [`CMakeLists.txt`](https://github.com/lmapii/cproject/blob/main/CMakeLists.txt) file. At the same time, we're allowing the `cmake` extension for `vscode` to configure the project when opening and therefore have all the fancy buttons and actions available to build the project in case you don't like the command line. Personally, I still fall back to the command line. But then, I'm a dinosaur.

Now, if you open the `dummy.c` file in your editor it will automatically format it according to the rules in your `.clang-format` file whenever you save the file. But what if someone in your team doesn't use `vscode` or forgot to enable the format-on-save feature?

### Wrapping `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` calls

> This section is a little self-promotion of two wrapper scripts for `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` that I am maintaining: [run-clang-tidy](https://github.com/lmapii/run-clang-tidy) and [run-clang-format](https://github.com/lmapii/run-clang-format). Both tools are command line tools written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) that simplify and parallelize the execution of `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` from the command line.

Reviewer: :crab:

> Installing the tools within your container _should_ be easy via the [Rust package manager `cargo`](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo), however, at the time of writing, I could not install any binaries inside a container via the `cargo` `apt` package, and installing the tools from scratch within the container simply took too much time, so I decided to download the released, architecture-specific version instead:

Reviewer: That's surprising. Does using the rustup download script not work either?

Author: So, installing using `rustup` seems to work but in increases the image size by 1 GB and compiling both tools from scratch takes another 10 minutes on my machine. I extended the article to mention this - this is a common pro/con evaluation when installing tools in a Dockerfile.

```bash
$ ceedling gcov:all

Test 'test_dummy.c'
-------------------
Compiling test_dummy_runner.c...
Compiling test_dummy.c...
Compiling dummy.c with coverage...
Compiling unity.c...
Compiling cmock.c...
Linking test_dummy.out...
Running test_dummy.out...

--------------------------
GCOV: OVERALL TEST SUMMARY
--------------------------
TESTED:  1
PASSED:  1
FAILED:  0
IGNORED: 0

---------------------------
GCOV: CODE COVERAGE SUMMARY
---------------------------
dummy.c Lines executed:100.00% of 2
dummy.c No branches
dummy.c No calls
```

The [`project.yml`](https://github.com/lmapii/cproject/blob/main/tests/unittest/project.yml) also sets up a utility for generating coverage reports. In this demo project we can generate a `gcovr` HTML report with the following command:

```bash
$ ceedling utils:gcov
Creating gcov results report(s) in 'build/artifacts/gcov'... Done in 1.359 seconds.
```

You'll now find the HTML report in `tests/unittest/build/artifacts/gcov/GcovCoverageResults.html`.

![]({% img_url c-dev-environment/gcovr-report.png %})

## Getting started with GitHub workflows

> We got quite far already, and this setup is way beyond the "works on my machine" type of environment: All of your contributors can build a development container and execute all steps to build or test your project. But there is one more thing that we should do to keep the project stable even if we're not actively working on it: Setting up a pipeline that periodically ensures that the environment still works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've gotten quite far already, and this setup is way beyond the "works on my machine" type of environment. All of your contributors can now build a development container and execute all steps to build or test your project. There is one more thing that we should do to keep the project stable even if we're not actively working on it: setting up a pipeline that periodically ensures that the environment still works.
```

Continuously testing and checking your code is important. Pipelines are now available on all major platforms such as [GitHub](https://github.com/), [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com/), or [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/). In this article we'll set up a [GitHub action](https://github.com/features/actions) which periodically builds our image and tests our code.

> There's yet another catch though: Ensuring that your Docker images build and using those Docker images in your pipeline can sometimes be a bit tedious. At the time of writing, GitHub has support for so-called [container actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/creating-actions/creating-a-docker-container-action) which allows executing in pipeline steps using a Docker container. These steps, however, assume that the image exists on some registry, e.g., [dockerhub](https://hub.docker.com/), and is not built within the action itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's yet another catch though: Ensuring that your Docker images build and using those Docker images in your pipeline can sometimes be a bit tedious. At the time of writing, GitHub has support for so-called [container actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/creating-actions/creating-a-docker-container-action) that allow executing pipeline steps inside a Docker container. These steps, however, assume that the image exists on some registry, e.g., [dockerhub](https://hub.docker.com/), and is not built within the action itself.
```
